Question: Sula says that other women were "only afraid of losing their jobs. Afraid their husbands would discover that no uniqueness lay between their legs" (119). What does this show about their identity in life?

Toni Morrison's novel Sula is a spider web of interconnecting themes regarding the way society works. First she critiques a woman's place in society, then she moves on to question the very nature of society and how it oppresses how people live their lives. The way Morrison describes husbands as jobs hints at the oppressive nature of a women's place in life while their fear of being discovered as similar demonstrates the effects of not living their life and instead clinging to societal norms. Sula digs deep and asks the reader how they live their life and whether they are actually living or if they are go through life already dead. 

There is strong symbolism to suggest that the way that women act in the Medallion is not how they themselves act, but rather a role that they put on for society. Morrision often uses language to suggest that the behavior of women in the novel is based on what society wants them to do rather than on their own personality. When Morrision discusses whether women were actually afraid of losing their husbands, she says they were "only afraid of losing their jobs" (119). Their relationship with their husband is not of love nor choice; it is their job, their responsibility to hold onto a husband. That is part of the reason for Sula not being able to attain a love life in which the pair of them were "comrades", as well as why Jude does not love Nel and married her for utilitarian reasons - a woman's relationship with a husband was not because the woman wanted it, but because society wanted it (121). When Morrision talks about the women in the Medallion not being able to take risks, she uses the same symbolism. "They were merely victims and knew how to behave in that role" - the wording Morrison uses suggests that these women are basing their reaction based on what they "know" society wants them to do (120). There is also some direct references to women being unable to actually live in the Medallion related to a "women's place in society." 

For Helen Wright and Nel, children were "more comfort and purpose than she had ever hoped to find in this life" because that was what society had deemed as the purpose of women: to raise children (128). Women were trained to marry a man and produce children, which is why Morrison describes them to be "like sour-tipped needles featuring one constant empty eye" (122). The needle imagery could be interpreted as the women being needles to inject their life in the children, and the line "had the sweetness sucked from their breath" supports it (122). Morrison even goes a step further to suggest that it is the only purpose that society has dedicated to women. Sula observed women that had "looked at the world and back at their children, back at the world and back again at their children, and... knew that one clear young eye was all that kept the knife away from the throat's curve" (122). The mantra of looking at their children and the world shows that these women do not see anything else - there are their children, and then there is some other stuff. The "clear young eye" represents their child's innocence - the eye is another symbol that Sula uses, usually referring to the "Lamb's eye" of innocence. Their child's innocence keeps them from slitting their own throat, which can be interpreted as them living for their children as well as not wanting to spoil their child. Society's idea of the role of a women leads to a bland and colorless life of simply marrying and raising a child.

Sula is the foil to society's idea of a women, which leads to her being hated. Sula's innocence was never tainted by society (see explication). Sula's innocence allows her to see society unobstructed by the things it was supposed to indoctrinate her with. She can see "every colored women in this country... dying like... stump[s]" (143). Dying like a stump symbolizes something being cut down - or death, which could imply that women were dead before they died. Sula compares this style of life to living as a spider and hanging onto the roof because of fear of falling and eventual death (121). Falling was living and falling onto the snake bellow meant death, but it was not death that women who ended up dying like a stump feared; it was the fall, life itself. The roof is what they are familiar with - societal norms. Instead of exploring life, these spiders clung to their norms for fear of "inventing" their own identity (121). As a result of seeing the effect society has on women, Sula was determined to "go down like one of those redwoods" and live life the way she wanted (143). As a result of her determination to live life, she was hated out of jealousy. They were jealous of how young she looked as a result of not raising children (118). They hated how she refused to follow society's norms and compliment people in spite of how she felt. They felt "suspicious" that she did not have to rely on anybody else to live life. Their jealousy of Sula is also evident by the ways she insults her. Rather than critique her actions towards Jude and Eva, people in the Medallion invented gossip to defile her name (117). In order to reassure themselves that the life Sula led was not any better than their own, they picked up their effort around the Medallion to make themselves happier, essentially trying to show Sula that they didn't need to "live" to be happy (119). 

Sula is a complex book that goes deeper than the surface plot. While on the surface it might seem that Sula is a selfish person who betrays her best friend, Sula's Sula is both a foil to the societal norms and a demonstration of what happens to people who try to fly in their lives. Explication of the symbols in the plot reveal existentialist themes that leave readers questioning how they live their lives (stop laughing at me).

10/10 Not reading again.
